The Media Nook: December 2023
December 2023

Editor's NoteMany thanks to Cassidy Johnson for her wonderful reviews the past couple of years. We've really enjoyed having a lighter side amidst the technical articles!

Cassidy is taking an extended break from Media Nook, so if you would like to write one article or a series on media that has captured your attention, please let us know!

________________________________


I can remember the first time someone told me Pluto was no longer considered a planet. I, at the mere age of 7, was furious! And I wasn’t the only one. Mike Brown, astronomer and author of How I Killed Pluto and Why It Had It Coming, received hate mail from children and adults alike following his press conference at Cal Tech to announce the demise of Pluto. “Pluto is dead,” he told the world. Nothing awful had happened to Pluto. It remained the same lovable ball of ice it had always been, but the announcement turned the astronomy community upside down.

Mike Brown’s book functions as both a memoir and an academic text on dwarf planets and the Kuiper belt. He studied astronomy for years, trying to find something out there that would allow him to make his mark on the field.

While I’ve never been an astronomy buff, I was still interested in this book because it was much more philosophical than I expected. Chapter one opens with the question, “What is a planet?” What a baffling question, I thought. I know what a planet is, I insisted to myself. Then I read the chapter and discovered that no, I did not know what a planet was. And neither did scientists in the 16th century. They called them “wanderers”, or things that moved in the sky. But by that logic, the sun was a planet, too and so was the moon. Of course, folks like Copernicus and Galileo eventually revealed that the sun was different because we orbited around it, but that knowledge wasn’t very kindly received.

It's funny how our intellect as humans can extend beyond our lifespan. Astronomers calculated things that they knew they wouldn’t live long enough to see happen. Mike Brown remembers seeing Saturn near Orion when he was younger and it took a full Saturn year, which is thirty Earth years, to see Saturn in that same spot in the sky again. He remarked that he has probably one Saturn year left in his life, but probably not two.

In the early 1800s, astronomers saw Ceres and Pallas, two small wanderers further than Mars but not as far as Jupiter, and they said to themselves, “I bet there are more”. By the 1850s, fifteen more of these little wanderers were discovered. There were so many in such an overlapping jumble that everyone agreed not to call them planets and instead called them asteroids. In 1930, Pluto was discovered. It was tempting to call it a planet, but its orbit was tilted about 20 degrees and it revolved around the sun in a super long ellipse that didn’t match the other planets’ orbits. But they couldn’t call it an asteroid because that word had become synonymous with the wanderers between Mars and Jupiter. It certainly wasn’t fuzzy enough to call a comet, so they decided it was indeed a planet.

The thing is, Pluto is not alone out there. In a stunning chapter full of surprises, Mike Brown describes the time he proposed to his wife, got tenure at CalTech, and found a new wanderer past Pluto all in one week. The wanderer was called Planet X at first but lost its planetary status before it ever officially received it. After getting an urgent request through to the folks running the Hubble Telescope, they discovered it was about half the size of Pluto, though it had less of a crazy orbit than Pluto. They renamed it Quaoar instead of Planet X and then began debating its impact on Pluto’s planetary status. Astronomers were sure of one thing. If this body exists, there are others out there, and one of them is going to be bigger than Pluto. CalTech quickly kicked off a fundraising campaign to study this more.

While he was initially disappointed by the emptiness he saw, he eventually found plenty of small objects and asteroids that make up the Kuiper Belt. He’d been fooled twice between 2000 and 2004 by Quaoar and Sedna, both of which were so icy and reflective that they looked big enough to be planets in his photos but were actually smaller than Pluto. By the end of 2004, he found Santa, which was renamed Haumea, another bright object in the Kuiper Belt. Cool, but not a planet. But less than a week later, he found Xena. Xena was indisputably bigger than Pluto.

Gossip, finger pointing, arguing, and data theft are a few things I didn’t expect from the astronomy community, but it was a very dramatic affair to say the least. It took over a year from the discovery of Xena for the astronomy community to figure out what to do with everyone’s favorite problem child, Pluto. The International Astronomy Union (IAU) had the final say-so about Xena’s planetary status, and by extension, Pluto’s. They decided to revisit the definition of the word planet and in doing so, decided to add one of Pluto’s moons to the definition because it seemed to orbit the sun more than Pluto, anyway. Planets, they decided, would be any round things that orbited the sun. Xena, Charon (pluto’s moon), and the asteroid Ceres would be added, Pluto would stay a planet, and we’d have 12 planets. Mike Brown promptly lost his mind when he heard the news. There were about 200 objects in the Kuiper belt that would count as planets by this new definition. To rectify that, the IAU decided to have a vote on the definition of a planet. In the end, they came to the same conclusion as Mike Brown: Pluto is not a planet, and neither is Xena, Charon, or Ceres.

To be a planet, they decided, a body must orbit the sun, be mostly round, and have such immense gravity that no other bodies other than satellites lie in the same orbit. Simply put, Pluto was too small and lived in too crowded a neighborhood to be a planet.

Mike Brown was able to watch a broadcast of the vote from his office at CalTech with some members of the press assembled. When it ended, he stood up and announced to the press, “Pluto is dead”.

The thing that enamored me the most about Mike Brown’s writing was his reminders of what really matters to him. Yes, his career and the entire astronomy community were thrown into chaos at these discoveries. However, he includes a brief interlude about his daughter’s birth, stating that he “wanted to hold Lilah tight as she made signs to the world around her and … tell her, ‘You are the most extraordinary thing in the universe’.” When he finds Planet X, he calls it the second best thing to happen to him that week, after his partner Dianne accepting his proposal of marriage. After making a bet with a friend on New Year’s Eve 1999 that someone would find a tenth planet in the next five years, he begged her to extend the bet by a few days so he can count Xena, discovered in early January 2005, as his winning ticket. There is so much personality in this book that makes it worth reading, even for folks like me who know next to nothing about the planets. I wasn’t initially interested in the planets themselves with this book, I was interested in the story but I eventually grew to like the pages-long descriptions of the dirty ice that makes up a comet and the strange volcanoes on one of Jupiter’s moons.

I may always miss calling Pluto a planet, but knowing the story behind it gave me some much needed closure and introduced me to Xena, Santa, Easter Bunny, Sedna, Quaoar, and plenty of other new non-planetary friends. How I Killed Pluto and Why It Had It Coming is an intelligent, witty book full of academic drama and philosophical musings about huge chunks of ice and rock that live millions of miles away from our home, and I can’t recommend it enough.
